Add info about column range tracking APIs (#3330)
timescale/docs: api/disable_column_stats.md

---
api_name: disable_column_stats()
excerpt: Disable range tracking for columns of chunks from a hypertable  
topics: [hypertables]
keywords: [hypertables, chunks, range-tracking]
tags: [columns, ranges, min-max, chunks]
api:
  license: apache
  type: function
---

# disable_column_stats()

> Allow users to disable ranges (min/max values) tracking 

Reviewer: Disable range tracking in a specific column of chunks in a hypertable.

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

for a specific column of chunks belonging to a hypertable.

### Required arguments

|Name|Type|Description|
|-|-|-|

> |`hypertable`|REGCLASS|Hypertable to which the column belongs to|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`hypertable`|REGCLASS|Hypertable that the column belongs to|
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

|`column_name`|TEXT|Column to disable tracking range statistics for|

### Optional arguments

|Name|Type|Description|
|-|-|-|

> |`if_not_exists`|BOOLEAN|Set to true to avoid throwing an error if ranges are not being tracked for the column. A notice is issued instead. Defaults to false|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`if_not_exists`|BOOLEAN|Set to `true` so that a notice is sent when ranges are not being tracked for a column. By default, an error is thrown. |
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

### Returns

|Column|Type|Description|
|-|-|-|
|`hypertable_id`|INTEGER|ID of the hypertable in TimescaleDB.|

> |`column_name`|TEXT|Name of the column to disable range tracking for|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`column_name`|TEXT|Name of the column range tracking is disabled for
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

> |`disabled`|BOOLEAN|True if the tracking was disabled, false when `if_not_exists` is true and entry was not removed|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`disabled`|BOOLEAN|Returns `true` when tracking is disabled. `false` when `if_not_exists` is `true` and the entry was not removed|
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

<Highlight type="note">

>  The range tracking has to have been enabled earlier on the column of the

Reviewer: To `disable_column_stats()`, you must have first call [enable_column_stats][enable_column_stats] and enabled rage tracking on a column in the hypertable.

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

 hypertable via the [enable_column_stats][enable_column_stats] function.

</Highlight>

### Sample use

> First convert table `conditions` to hypertable with time

Reviewer: In this sample, you convert the `conditions` table to a hypertable with

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

> partitioning on column `time`, then specify and enable additional columns to track ranges for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
partitioning on the `time` column. You then specify and enable additional columns to track ranges for.
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

> Then disable the range tracking:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You then disable rrange tracking:
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

```sql
SELECT create_hypertable('conditions', 'time');
SELECT enable_column_stats('conditions', 'device_id');
SELECT disable_column_stats('conditions', 'device_id');
```

<Highlight type="note">

>  It's recommended to enable range tracking on columns which are correlated to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Best practice is to enable range tracking on columns which are correlated to the
```

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.

>  partitioning column. In other words, enable tracking on secondary columns which are

Reviewer: partitioning column. In other words, enable tracking on secondary columns that are
 referenced in the WHERE clauses in your queries. 
 
 Use this API to disable range tracking on columns when the query patterns don't use this secondary column anymore.

Reviewer 2: @billy-the-fish done.
